Adds VSCode migration page (#93)
posit-dev/positron-website: migrate-vscode.qmd

The language support includes intelligent code completion, syntax highlighting, error detection, and debugging capabilities. You can switch between Python and R environments within the same workspace, making it easy to work on multilingual data science projects.

::: {.panel-tabset}

## Python
Positron has first-class support for Python, including a built-in Python Console for interactive sessions, a Data Explorer to inspect data frames, a Plots pane to visualize plots and other generated graphics, and a fully interactive Viewer pane to see locally running content. Positron also supports Python packages and libraries, allowing you to work with popular data science tools like NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and more.

### Prerequisites
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation and environment managers, including:

- [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)
- [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)

> 

Reviewer: I think an `include` may be what we would be looking for in such a case: https://quarto.org/docs/authoring/includes.html

> 

Reviewer 2: Whoops, julia is right! We want includes - not variables!

::: callout-note
Positron comes bundled with several useful extensions, including those for Quarto, Jupyter notebooks, and Pyright. It also includes built-in extensions to enable language features. More information about these default extensions can be found in the [Extensions documentation](extensions.qmd#included-extensions).
:::

## Language support

Positron provides native language integration for Python and R. Unlike VS Code, which relies on extensions for language support, Positron has built-in interpreters and language servers for both languages. This native integration enables deeper features like the Console, Variables pane, and Data Explorer to work seamlessly with your code and data.

The language support includes intelligent code completion, syntax highlighting, error detection, and debugging capabilities. You can switch between Python and R environments within the same workspace, making it easy to work on multilingual data science projects.

:::: panel-tabset
## Python

> Positron has first-class support for Python, including a built-in Python Console for interactive sessions, a Data Explorer to inspect data frames, a Plots pane to visualize plots and other generated graphics, and a fully interactive Viewer pane to see locally running content. Positron also supports Python packages and libraries, allowing you to work with popular data science tools like NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and more.

Reviewer: Can you add the same links to other pages here that you have in the R tabset?

### Prerequisites

To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation and environment managers, including:

{{< include "_python-managers.qmd" >}}

Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python. <!-- TODO: Add link above -->

### Coming from the Python extension

VS Code users who rely on the `ms-python.python` extension will find that Positron provides all of its functionality and more by default. These include:

-   Code completion and IntelliSense, based on [Jedi](https://jedi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
-   Type checking, using [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/)
-   Formatting, using [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/)
-   Debugging
-   Jupyter notebook support
-   Variables pane, for inspecting variables and data frames
-   [Help pane](help-pane.qmd), for quick access to documentation

### Python in the Console

> Positron's Console pane provides an interactive IPython session. You can type Python code directly into the Console or run files open in the editor. You can also choose to run a portion of a file open in the editor, similar to a Jupyter Notebook but with any standard Python file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Positron Console pane provides an interactive IPython session. You can type Python code directly into the Console or run files open in the editor. You can also choose to run a portion of a file open in the editor, similar to a Jupyter Notebook but with any standard Python file.
```

> While you can launch IPython from the Terminal as you would in VS Code, the Console provides code completion, syntax highlighting, and integration with the Variables and Plots panes -- among other features that enhance the interactive experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While you can launch IPython from the Terminal as you would in VS Code, the Console provides code completion, syntax highlighting, integration with the Variables and Plots panes, and other features that enhance the interactive experience.
```

Positron bundles IPython, allowing you to use the console without installing it separately. If you wish to use an external version of IPython, you can toggle the use of the bundled one with the [`python.useBundledIpykernel` setting](positron://settings/python.useBundledIpykernel).

> By default, the Console enables IPython's [`autoreload` extension](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config/extensions/autoreload.html) for imports. You can change this with the [`python.enableAutoReload` setting](positron://settings/python.enableAutoReload).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the Console enables the IPython [`autoreload` extension](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config/extensions/autoreload.html) feature for imports. You can change this with the [`python.enableAutoReload` setting](positron://settings/python.enableAutoReload).
```

Author: Went with this, but removed the trailing "feature" - "`autoreload` extension feature" sounds too wordy for me.

### Prerequisites

To use R in Positron, you need to have R installed on your system. Positron automatically detects your R installation and provides full language support. <!-- TODO: Add link above -->

::: callout-note
If you have been accustomed to using the `vscode-r` extension in VS Code, be aware that [this extension is not compatible with Positron](extensions.qmd#non-compatible-extensions). Positron's native integration means you do not need the `vscode-r` extension; instead, Positron's built-in features allow you to work with your R code and data.
:::
::::

## Command palette

If you are familiar with the Command Palette in Visual Studio Code, you will find the experience in Positron very similar. All Positron-specific commands are included, alongside the familiar VS Code commands.

For a detailed overview of the Command Palette, see the [Visual Studio Code Command Palette documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette). Most of the tips and workflows described there also apply to Positron.

## Help & feedback

> Positron's features are explored further in other Guides within this section. If you encounter any issues during migration or while using Positron, check out the [troubleshooting guide](troubleshooting.qmd) for common solutions. The [FAQ](faqs.qmd) addresses a comprehensive list of frequent questions from users transitioning from other editors.

Reviewer 2: I've noticed there's a few places where we use the "Positron's" contraction and I think our style guide mentions avoiding this when possible. It sounds a bit odd and would be worthwhile to rephrase.

Maybe something like:
```suggestion
You can learn more about Positron features in other guides within this section. If you encounter issues during migration or while using Positron, see the [troubleshooting guide](troubleshooting.qmd) for common solutions. The [FAQ](faqs.qmd) provides answers to frequent questions from users who are transitioning from other editors.
```

---
title: Migrating from VS Code
---

## Overview

> Positron will feel natural to you if you use VS Code. At its core, Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), with a focus on data science and native support for R and Python. You will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, extensions, and more.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron will feel natural to you if you use VS Code. At its core, Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), with a focus on data science and native support for Python and R. You will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, extensions, and more.  
```

Where Positron differs is in its language integration and data science capabilities:  

- the Console for interactive R and Python sessions

> - the Variables pane and Data Explorer, for inspecting live data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the Variables pane and [Data Explorer](data-explorer.qmd), for inspecting live data
```

- the Plots pane for visualizing plots and other generated graphics
- the [Connections pane](/connections-pane.qmd) for managing database connections and exploring data
- the [Help pane](/help-pane.qmd) for quick access to language and library documentation

> This blend of familiarity and data science focus will supercharge your work in an easy-to-learn way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blend of familiarity and data science focus will supercharge your work with a low barrier to transition.
```

I am so sensitive to documentation ever saying anything is "easy" -- a pet peeve of mine 😭

Author: I was going to use barrier to entry, but thought it was too wordy. 😂

## First steps

### Importing settings
Positron supports importing settings from VS Code. It will prompt you to do so with a notification on the first launch, allowing you to import user settings from your existing VS Code installation. It will open a preview before saving these imported settings, so you can review and modify them as needed.

> If you skip this step, you can import settings at any time by opening the Command Palette (<kbd>Ctrl+Shift+P</kbd>, or <kbd>Cmd+Shift+P</kbd> on macOS) and running the command `Preferences: Import Settings...`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you skip this step, you can import settings at any time by opening the Command Palette (<kbd>Cmd/Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>P</kbd>) and running the command _Preferences: Import Settings..._. 
```

For consistency with other pages

### Installing extensions
Positron supports most extensions that you use in VS Code. These extensions can be installed using the Extensions pane, found in the Positron sidebar.  

> If an extension does not appear in your search, it may be unavailable on Positron's extension marketplace, [OpenVSX](https://open-vsx.org/). You can contact the developer of that extension to request its publication to OpenVSX for installation in Positron.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an extension does not appear in your search, it may be unavailable on the extension marketplace that Positron uses, [OpenVSX](https://open-vsx.org/). You can contact the developer of that extension to [request its publication to OpenVSX](extensions.qmd#open-vsx) for installation in Positron.
```

New heading in https://github.com/posit-dev/positron-website/pull/92

::: callout-note

> Positron comes bundled with several useful extensions, including those for Quarto, Jupyter notebooks, and Pyright. It also includes built-in extensions to enable language features. More information about these default extensions can be found in the [Extensions documentation](extensions.qmd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron comes bundled with several useful extensions, including those for Quarto, Jupyter notebooks, and Pyright. It also includes built-in extensions to enable language features. More information about these default extensions can be found in the [Extensions documentation](extensions.qmd#included-extensions).
```

New heading in https://github.com/posit-dev/positron-website/pull/92

:::

## Language support

::: {.panel-tabset}

## Python

> Positron has first-class support for Python, including a built-in Python Console for interactive sessions, a Data Explorer for inspecting data frames, and a Viewer pane for visualizing plots and other generated graphics. Positron also supports Python packages and libraries, allowing you to work with popular data science tools like NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron has first-class support for Python, including a built-in Python Console for interactive sessions, a Data Explorer to inspect data frames, a Plots pane to visualize plots and other generated graphics, and a fully interactive Viewer pane to see locally running content. Positron also supports Python packages and libraries, allowing you to work with popular data science tools like NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and more.
```

### Prerequisites
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation managers, including:

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)
- [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)

> Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python. More details about Python support in Positron can be found in the [Python documentation](#).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python.
```

I'd say let's just leave it out for now.

<!-- TODO: Add link above -->

### Coming from the Python extension
VS Code users who rely on the `ms-python.python` extension will find that Positron provides all of its functionality and more by default. These include:

- Code completion and IntelliSense, based on [Jedi](https://jedi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- Type checking, using [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/)
- Formatting, using [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/)
- Debugging
- Jupyter notebook support

> Positron's Console pane provides an interactive IPython session. You can run type Python code directly into the Console or run files open in the editor. By default, the Console enables IPython's [`autoreload` extension](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config/extensions/autoreload.html) for imports. You can change this with the [`Python: Enable Auto Reload` setting](positron://settings/python.enableAutoReload).

Reviewer: Can we also similarly mention here that we bundle ipykernel and link to the setting to not use it?

## R

> Positron has deeper and more fluid integration with the R ecosystem than VS Code. Its tools work seamlessly with R and do not require any extensions for this integration. You can use the Console for interactive R sessions, the Data Explorer for inspecting data frames, and the Viewer pane for visualizing plots and other graphics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Positron has a deeper and more cohesive integration for R workflows than VS Code. Its approach works seamlessly with R and does not require any extensions for this integration. You can use the Console for interactive R sessions, the Data Explorer for inspecting data frames, and the Plots pane for visualizing plots and other graphics.
```

### Prerequisites

> To use R in Positron, you need to have R installed on your system. Positron automatically detects your R installation and provides full language support. More details about R support in Positron can be found in the [R documentation](#).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use R in Positron, you need to have R installed on your system. Positron automatically detects your R installation and provides full language support.
```

Let's leave this until we have something to link to.

<!-- TODO: Add link above -->

::: callout-note

> If you use the `vscode-r` extension in VS Code, you will find that Positron provides a more integrated experience for R. This native integration means you do not need the `vscode-r` extension, and in fact, the extension will not work in Positron. Instead, Positron's built-in features allow you to work with R code and data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have been accustomed to using the `vscode-r` extension in VS Code, be aware that [this extension is not compatible with Positron](extensions.qmd#non-compatible-extensions). Positron's native integration means you do not need the `vscode-r` extension; instead, Positron's built-in features allow you to work with your R code and data.
```

If an extension does not appear in your search, it may be unavailable on the extension marketplace that Positron uses, [OpenVSX](https://open-vsx.org/). You can contact the developer of that extension to [request its publication to OpenVSX](extensions.qmd#open-vsx) for installation in Positron.

::: callout-note
Positron comes bundled with several useful extensions, including those for Quarto, Jupyter notebooks, and Pyright. It also includes built-in extensions to enable language features. More information about these default extensions can be found in the [Extensions documentation](extensions.qmd#included-extensions).
:::

## Language support

::: {.panel-tabset}

## Python
Positron has first-class support for Python, including a built-in Python Console for interactive sessions, a Data Explorer to inspect data frames, a Plots pane to visualize plots and other generated graphics, and a fully interactive Viewer pane to see locally running content. Positron also supports Python packages and libraries, allowing you to work with popular data science tools like NumPy, Pandas, Matplotlib, and more.

### Prerequisites

> To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation managers, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation and environment managers, including:
```

Since venv isn't really a whole Python installation

---

> title: Migrating from VS Code

Reviewer 3: For SEO purposes, it might be worthwhile to make the title more complete, for example: "Migrating to Positron from VS Code". (In the navigation on the left you'd still want this shorter title.)

Author: Any idea if we can accomplish this in Quarto? I tried `toc-title` in the preamble with no luck. cc @juliasilge

Author: That worked - thanks!

---

> 

Reviewer 3: I would add a sentence or two that explains what this page is about. Something like: "This page explains how to get started with Positron in case you're already familiar with VS Code. We start with an overview of the key differences and continue with instructions to importing your settings and installing extensions."

## Overview

> Positron will feel natural to you if you use VS Code. At its core, Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), with a focus on data science and native support for Python and R. You will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, extensions, and more.  

Reviewer 3: > Positron will feel natural to you if you use VS Code.

Perhaps not immediately, but certainly after this smooth migration.

> Positron will feel natural to you if you use VS Code. At its core, Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), with a focus on data science and native support for Python and R. You will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, extensions, and more.  

Reviewer 3: > At its core, Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), with a focus on data science and native support for Python and R. You will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, extensions, and more. 

Positron is built on [Code OSS](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode), the open source core of VS Code. That is why you will find many familiar features like the text editor interface, terminal, and extensions. 

Where Positron differs is in its Python and R integration and its data science capabilities:

Reviewer: Let's update this sentence to say:

> ... text editor interface, command palette, terminal, and extensions

cc @dhruvisompura and related to #7541 (we're going to talk about the command palette in separate, different ways in the VS Code and RStudio migration guides)

Where Positron differs is in its language integration and data science capabilities:  

> - the Console for interactive R and Python sessions

Reviewer 3: I would mention Python first for consistency.

- the Variables pane and [Data Explorer](data-explorer.qmd), for inspecting live data
- the Plots pane for visualizing plots and other generated graphics
- the [Connections pane](/connections-pane.qmd) for managing database connections and exploring data
- the [Help pane](/help-pane.qmd) for quick access to language and library documentation

> This blend of familiarity and data science focus will supercharge your work with a low barrier to transition.

Reviewer 3: s/transition/migrate/

Author: "...a low barrier to [migrate/migration]" sounds strange, to me. I think "barrier to transition" flows better, but can be persuaded to another alternative.

Reviewer 3: You're right, that does sound strange. I was trying to avoid using the word "transition" because it's not used elsewhere in the page.

## First steps

> 

Reviewer 3: "When you launch Positron for the first time, you likely want to import your existing VS Code settings and install the extensions you are used to."

Author: I think "importing settings" and "installing extensions" communicates the difference; no?

### Importing settings
Positron supports importing settings from VS Code. It will prompt you to do so with a notification on the first launch, allowing you to import user settings from your existing VS Code installation. It will open a preview before saving these imported settings, so you can review and modify them as needed.

If you skip this step, you can import settings at any time by opening the Command Palette (<kbd>Cmd/Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>P</kbd>) and running the command _Preferences: Import Settings..._. 

### Installing extensions

> Positron supports most extensions that you use in VS Code. These extensions can be installed using the Extensions pane, found in the Positron sidebar.  

Reviewer 3: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/search?target=VSCode&category=All%20categories&sortBy=Installs lists 76472 results while https://open-vsx.org lists 5391 results. Is it fair to use the word "most" here?

Author: What's an accurate alternative that is still positive? Many?

Reviewer 3: "many" sounds good to me.

If an extension does not appear in your search, it may be unavailable on the extension marketplace that Positron uses, [OpenVSX](https://open-vsx.org/). You can contact the developer of that extension to [request its publication to OpenVSX](extensions.qmd#open-vsx) for installation in Positron.

::: callout-note
Positron comes bundled with several useful extensions, including those for Quarto, Jupyter notebooks, and Pyright. It also includes built-in extensions to enable language features. More information about these default extensions can be found in the [Extensions documentation](extensions.qmd#included-extensions).
:::

## Language support

> 

Reviewer 3: I would add a sentence between these two headers. Something like: "Positron has excellent support for Python and R."

### Prerequisites
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation and environment managers, including:

- [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)
- [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)

Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python.
<!-- TODO: Add link above -->

### Coming from the Python extension
VS Code users who rely on the `ms-python.python` extension will find that Positron provides all of its functionality and more by default. These include:

- Code completion and IntelliSense, based on [Jedi](https://jedi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- Type checking, using [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/)
- Formatting, using [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/)
- Debugging
- Jupyter notebook support

> ### Python in the Console

Reviewer 3: The terms "console" and "terminal" are often used interchangeably in other places, but in Positron they are definitely two different things. Would it make sense to clarify the difference here, so that new users can appreciate that the Console is a new feature?

### Prerequisites
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation managers, including:

- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)
- [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)

Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python.
<!-- TODO: Add link above -->

### Coming from the Python extension
VS Code users who rely on the `ms-python.python` extension will find that Positron provides all of its functionality and more by default. These include:

- Code completion and IntelliSense, based on [Jedi](https://jedi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- Type checking, using [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/)
- Formatting, using [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/)
- Debugging
- Jupyter notebook support

<!-- vale Posit.Headings = NO -->
### Python in the Console

> <!-- vale Posit.Headings = YES -->

Author: This feels wrong. Should we add capital-Console to Vale's allow-list?

Reviewer: I agree! That list is here: https://github.com/posit-dev/positron-website/blob/main/.github/styles/config/vocabularies/posit-docs/accept.txt

Reviewer: You'll probably need to update the unrelated file now.

### Prerequisites
To use Python in Positron, you need to have Python installed on your system. Positron supports several Python installation and environment managers, including:

- [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html)
- [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)
- [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv)
- [conda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/)

Python installations and environments created with these tools will be automatically detected, and enable Positron's deep integration with Python.
<!-- TODO: Add link above -->

### Coming from the Python extension
VS Code users who rely on the `ms-python.python` extension will find that Positron provides all of its functionality and more by default. These include:

- Code completion and IntelliSense, based on [Jedi](https://jedi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- Type checking, using [Pyright](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/)
- Formatting, using [Ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/)
- Debugging

> - Jupyter notebook support

Reviewer 4: I think the Variables pane is worth mentioning (I just opened #8272). And maybe Help pane?

Author: Awesome! We can update this page to link out when that PR is ready.

### Python in the Console

> Positron's Console pane provides an interactive IPython session. You can run type Python code directly into the Console or run files open in the editor. While you can launch IPython from the Terminal as you would in VS Code, the Console provides code completion, syntax highlighting, and integration with the Variables and Plots panes -- among other features that enhance the interactive experience.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Positron's Console pane provides an interactive IPython session. You can type Python code directly into the Console or run files open in the editor. While you can launch IPython from the Terminal as you would in VS Code, the Console provides code completion, syntax highlighting, and integration with the Variables and Plots panes -- among other features that enhance the interactive experience.
```

Not sure if another re-wording is preferred, but something is needed.

I also feel like the ability to send bits of code from a file to the Console is super useful, i.e. that you don't have to run the *whole* file. I'm not a real Python user, though, so I could be off-base. But I've always sort of thought that the popularity of notebooks might be because this feature wasn't as readily available in Python vs. R (?).

Author: Let me know if the updated verbiage sounds good to you. I drew an analogy to Notebooks, but I worry this may give some users the wrong impression.

Positron bundles IPython, allowing you to use the console without installing it separately. If you wish to use an external version of IPython, you can toggle the use of the bundled one with the [`python.useBundledIpykernel` setting](positron://settings/python.useBundledIpykernel).

By default, the Console enables IPython's [`autoreload` extension](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config/extensions/autoreload.html) for imports. You can change this with the [`python.enableAutoReload` setting](positron://settings/python.enableAutoReload).

## R

> Positron has a deeper and more cohesive integration for R workflows than VS Code. Its approach works seamlessly with R and does not require any extensions for this integration. You can use the Console for interactive R sessions, the Data Explorer for inspecting data frames, and the Plots pane for visualizing plots and other graphics.

Reviewer 4: I'd also mention the Variables and Help panes here.
